Edway

A Line-Oriented Audio Editor

by Chuck Hallenbeck: chuckh@ftml.net

Edway is a Linux text console program which emulates the line-at-a-time
editors ed, edbrowse, fred, or qed, applying many of their commands to
the task of editing audio files.

Of Course there are no "lines" of audio, but instead blocks of samples
of arbitrary length serve a similar purpose.  Instead of printing lines
of a text file to the screen, Edway plays blocks of samples on the host
computer, using the alsa library interface.  The user can, for example,
read or write to an edit session or file (using R or W), play a block
of samples or range of blocks (using P), move or transfer blocks of
samples within a file (using M or T), mark a block for subsequent
reference (using K), and delete a range of blocks (using D), in the
familiar line editor command syntax.  The conventions of using a dot
to reference the current block and a dollar sign to reference the last
block of a file are maintained.  The equal sign reports the current
block's number, a marked block's number, or the last block's number,
as with line editors.  The question mark describes the parameters of the
current file.  The exclamation point drops to a shell in the usual way.
The Z command functions exactly as with a line editor, as does the F
command, to report or change the filename.

Additional specialized two-or three letter commands using the same
syntax perform audio-specific chores, such as changing sample rate
or the number of channels (using SR and NC), changing the file type
(using FT), selecting the duration of blocks or the number of blocks
in the file (using MS or NB), applying a gain control (using DB), or
displaying the loudness of a block or range of blocks (also using DB,
but with a parameter), and others.

Installation

Caution: Before attempting the following, make sure your system has these
libraries available, which may not be routinely installed from the start:
1. readline, 2. ncurses, 3. libsndfile, and 4. libasound.

1. Unpack the program tarball, and enter the resulting directory.

2. Type "make" and press enter.

3. As root, type "make install" and press enter.

If everything worked okay, you have an executable program called "edway"
in /usr/local/bin.  There is no global configuration. Each user has his
or her own configuration directory, created the first time edway is run
by the user, called ".edway". 

Edway can capture audio from the system's sound card.  Four executable
scripts are required to do this: capline.edw, capmike.edw, capwave.edw,
and capstop.edw.  Samples of these files can be found in the user's
configuration directory, and must be moved to a directory where they
can be executed.  The sample files work for the snd_intel8x0 driver,
but may need to be rewritten for other drivers.  The user is responsible
for rewriting these scripts.

Edway is a work in progress" (I hate that phrase too), but its present
form provides sufficient functionality to be of interest to the
courageous.  Online documentation is not complete at present, but will
grow as the program matures.  For starters, type "edway -h" at a command
prompt.  Then enter the program by typing "edway" and pressing enter.
Now type the command 'h' and press enter to access the edway manual with
your favorite browser.  Alternatively, you may type h, a space, and an
edway command or option, for online help with that command or option.

August, 2009

Download from edway.ftml.net, our weblog at edway.wordpress.com

